Now that I've given
you an overview of what
the non-concurrent
collector behavior is,
and kind of how it's
used at a high level,
let's spend some
time looking in more
detail into its Application
Programming Interface, or API.
And as you can see, it's
a fairly simple interface,
but what each of
these phases does,
take some understanding to see
how everything fits together.
The collector interface
is a generic interface,
and it is parameterized
by three generic types.
The first type, which is given
the very cryptic and concise
letter name key, is
basically the type of element
that's available in
the stream, which
could be long string,
search results, or whatever.
A is the type of mutable
accumulator object
that the streams
framework will use
to collect the elements
that are coming
in from the stream that's
feeding into the collector.
And this could be List
of T, which could be
an ArrayList, the LinkedList.
It could be various other types.
It's usually something
like a list of something.
And then the final
generic type, which
is also given the very
useful mnemonic R,
is the type of the final result,
which could be List of T. Often
the accumulator type
and the result type
are the same, but
not always, as we'll
see when we get further into the
course and we talk about some
of the cool uses of
collectors for the Java
CompletableFuture's framework,
where there are very different.
So that's basically
the generic types.
Then there's also
five methods that
are defined in the
collector interface.
And some of these
are overloaded,
but they're basically five
of them that really matter.
So in this particular
case, we assume
we're implementing a
non-concurrent collector.
One of the methods is
called characteristics,
and this is used to provide
metadata, which is basically
additional information about
the collector that can be used
for internal optimizations.
Here's some of the
different characteristics.
Here are all the
characters exactly.
There are just three of them.
One characteristic is, is the
collector ordered or unordered?
And all that means
is, if you set
the unordered characteristic,
that means the collector need
not preserve encounter order.
Interestingly
enough, a collector
is free to preserve
encounter order
if there's no additional
overhead to do so.
And that's often the case,
because oftentimes we--
especially for
sequential strains--
we just store these
things into an array list.
So encounter order is sort
of trivially preserved.
Another characteristic
is whether the collector
has so-called identity
finish or not.
And what this means is, if
you set this characteristic,
it means that the finisher
method, which we'll talk about
in a minute, is
essentially a no-op,
so it doesn't need to be
called because whatever is done
after we finish
accumulating everything,
we stored in the beautiful
result container,
which can just be
returned directly
without having to go
through the finisher method.
And the third and final
characteristic is concurrent.
And this is, of
course, the one that
differentiates from a concurrent
and a non-concurrent collector.
And this is going to
indicate whether or not
the accumulator method
is called concurrently
on the mutable result container.
If concurrent is set, if the
concurrent characteristic
is set, then the
accumulator method
can be called concurrently
on the result container
by more than one thread
in the thread pool.
Which, of course, means that
the mutable result container
must be synchronized somehow,
either by using explicit locks
or by using some
Java collection,
like a concurrent hash
map, that comes out
of the box with proper
synchronization.
In our example here, we're
going to focus solely
on non-concurrent collectors.
So concurrent is not set.
We'll talk about concurrent
collectors later.
Then there's the
characteristics method,
which is one of the
methods you have to define,
needs to return the
appropriate characteristics.
You could just return--
you could just have nothing.
You could just be empty.
You could have no
characteristics at all.
Here's an example
of how to define
the characteristics you want.
So in this case, we're going
to create characteristics
that have concurrent, unordered,
and identity finish all set,
and we do that by using the
EnumSet.of factory method
and passing in the
appropriate EnumSet
we want to turn into
an unmodifiable set.
So you can mix and
match these things.
But be aware you don't
have to set any of these
if you don't want to.
Let's now talk about the
really interesting methods.
There's a bunch of
factory methods here
that are used by the
streams framework.
The first factory method
is called supplier.
And this is a
factory method that
returns the supplier
that acts as a factory
to generate an empty
result container,
the empty mutable
the one that's going to
be used to accumulate
all the elements into in
the stream by the collector.
Here is a pretty common example
of a supplier implementation.
As you can see here, we simply
have this factory method
return a constructor
reference to an array list.
So we say array list
colon colon new.
That gets returned as
the result of supplier.
And what that means is
the streams framework
will then use that
constructor reference
in order to get
the mutable result
container, which will be,
in this case, an array list.
The next method that
you have to fill in
is another factor method that
returns a by consumer that
adds a new element
to an existing result
container, which, of course,
would have been returned
previously by supplier.
So, in this particular
case, all accumulator
is going to need
to do is it's going
to need to return the add
method that's defined on list.
So the list interface
defines an add method.
And, as you can
imagine, what that does
is that goes ahead
and adds an element--
in this case, of type integer--
to the list.
So that's all we need to do.
That's what the bi-consumer
is going to store.
Recall that
non-concurrent collectors
need no synchronization.
So we can just use
list colon colon
add, which is not in
any way, shape or form
a synchronized method.
It's just a plain,
old, non-thread-safe,
nonsynchronized
method, and that's
all we need in this
particular case.
The next method is a factory
method called combiner.
And this returns a
binary operator that
is used for parallel
streams to merge two result
containers together.
And you'll see why
we need to do that,
because for a non-concurrent
collector used
in a parallel stream,
it needs to be
able to take the results from
two sub results that are done
in different threads,
and in a single thread,
merge their results together
to create a combined
result or merged result.
This particular
example, as you can see,
takes two lists,
one and another,
and it adds another to the
end of one and returns one,
so that basically just
concatenates the list together.
I showed this year
for completeness.
Be aware that combiner is never
called for sequential stream,
because we're not ever
combining anything
because we don't have to worry
about that because there's
only one thread.
And then the fifth and final
method is the finisher method.
And this returns a function that
converts the result container
into the final result type.
Now, for lots of collectors,
you can either just
return the identity
function which
it says return whatever the
mutable result container is.
Whatever that happened
to be by the time
you're done accumulating
everything, that's
what finish your returns.
Or you can set the identity
finish characteristic
and just return null
because, in that case,
the finisher method
will never be
called because the framework
knows it doesn't do anything.
It's just a no-op.
Now, for lots of examples,
a lot of the simple examples
that we're looking at,
finisher is in fact a no-op,
and the identity finish
characteristic is, in fact,
set when the collector
is built. However,
you could have much much more
interesting finisher methods.
And when we talk about
the futures collector
implementation and we talk
about Java completable futures
in the future, in
future weeks, you'll
see how this finisher is a lot
more interesting because what
it does is it actually
returns a single completable
future to either a
LinkedList or an ArrayList,
or a stream of
completable futures
which are off processing in
the background in parallel.
So that's a lot, lot,
lot more interesting
than the simple examples
we've looked at so far.
But for right now, we
don't need to go there
because what we're doing
is fairly straightforward.